.. post:: Dec 04, 2016
   :tags: OCaml
   :author: Trevor Smith, Michelle Micallef
   :excerpt: 2

Go risky on libraries, conservative on infrastructure
==========================

.. image:: _static/author_imgs/t-and-m.png
   :align: right

by Trevor Smith and Michelle Micallef
*************************************



 *This post was a collaboration between Michelle Micallef and Trevor
 Smith. Trevor is the VP of engineering at Arena. Michelle is an
 engineer at Arena*

Getting a company off the ground is an exercise in risk management. When
I was hired to build out engineering here at Arena, I was tasked to form
an engineering team and choose our founding technologies. These
decisions had to be made to maximize stability, while allowing us to
innovate quickly. An important choice was what language our engineers
would use. There are many ways a software engineer’s day is impacted by
the language [#]_. I approached these decisions with a risk management
mindset. The idea is simple and commonplace: you weigh the risks of a
choice compared with the gain to those involved. This pragmatic strategy
was reinforced by a friend who advised me during this time to “go risky
on libraries, conservative on infrastructure.” This is what we did.

Most importantly, the language choice affects *how engineers
conceptualize problems and their solutions*. The language frequently
dictates how one represents data, changes to data across time and
exceptional circumstances. Not only does the language choice have this
philosophical import, there are also important day-to-day concerns about
workable, efficient tooling, and quality library choices.

I wanted our preferred language to be OCaml. OCaml gives engineers great
paradigms to conceptualize problems and their solutions. The benefits of
the language are `already
<https://tech.esper.com/2014/07/15/why-we-use-ocaml/>`_  `well blogged
<http://engineering.issuu.com/2015/09/17/ocaml-production.html>`_ and
`spoken <https://blogs.janestreet.com/why-ocaml/>`_ about but in my
opinion, the standout features include a simple way to represent data
with first-class algebraic data types, a strong static type system that
prevents a whole class of errors, and also a module system for
abstraction and encapsulation. And so, I believed using OCaml would
allow our engineering team to write reliable software fast. This
decision was not without risks. The community of OCaml developers is
very small compared with those of more popular languages such as Java or
Python. With a smaller community comes less breadth of available
libraries. With a smaller demographic of users to sway library writers,
there is a high risk of incompatibility when a certain service doesn’t
choose OCaml as one of their supported languages. However, I felt that
these risks could all be addressed, and that the benefits that OCaml
would bring would far outweigh the costs of addressing these risks.

With libraries, the biggest risk I foresaw were gaps in
functionality. There are mature libraries from prolific open source
contributors as well as epic work done by industry titans and research
universities. Nonetheless, from personal experience I knew of holes. For
example, we needed to connect to a client MSSQL database but OCaml
doesn’t have a library that can connect to MSSQL. While many in the open
source community may not be concerned with connecting to a proprietary
database, it became a real and pressing concern for our team when we
needed to integrate. This is exactly the kind of issue that comes up in
a company where a more mainstream language would have bindings, and we
do not. However, there was an easy workaround: when necessary, use
another language that does have that library. The risk here is creating
a polyglot codebase. To combat that risk we are intentional about
specifying a tight interface for the specific functionality that are we
trying to leverage. For example, when we were writing some logic that
would connect to a webservice, we discovered that there wasn’t an
actively maintained SOAP client written in OCaml. Undeterred, we wrote a
script in Python and used the `Zeep
<http://docs.python-zeep.org/en/master/>`_ client. The majority of our
business logic remained in OCaml until we shelled out to our Python
script to communicate via SOAP, keeping the surface area of our borrowed
language small. Unfortunately because of the smaller OCaml community we
can’t write exclusively in OCaml but our workaround still allows us to
use it most of the time and reap its benefits.

The other risk was that the available libraries would not be as
battle-tested as they might have been if OCaml was more widely used. In
this case, the remedy is less clear. If the repo maintainer is
responsive, we could report a bug and hope for a speedy repair. If our
team is familiar enough with the library source code, we could
contribute and push a fix ourselves. If neither of these are true, we
could always fall back on another language that has an analogous
library. The last option itself introduces risk because if the team has
been using an OCaml library, it’s likely that other existing code uses
this library. So far, when we have discovered bugs, they were either
fixed promptly or we were able to engineer a workaround in our code.

In a sense timing was everything. Other than having enough libraries,
for a language to be a viable choice there has to be tooling for
developers to feel comfortable while working with it. For a number of
years, I had wanted to suggest using OCaml at places I worked. However,
I couldn’t in good faith tell my superiors that using OCaml would
increase productivity and then have the dev team lose modern IDE
productivity gains and need to re-write package management for
themselves. Then … BOOM! 2013 happened. `OPAM
<https://opam.ocaml.org>`_, a package manager, and `Merlin
<https://github.com/the-lambda-church/merlin>`_, a code editing tool
that contains modern IDE features, were released. Merlin especially has
been popular with our team. With these tools I felt reassured that my
developers would be able to successfully use OCaml.

Heeding my friend’s advice, when it came to infrastructure, AWS was the
obvious choice. Released in 2006, AWS has been used by thousands of
companies including Amazon itself which is the largest online
retailer. Additionally, this choice made me more comfortable with my
OCaml gamble. If using OCaml had proved to be unworkable, there would
have been other mature ecosystems (e.g. Java or Python) that are
compatible with AWS that we could switch to easily. Fortunately, we
never had to take this exit ramp and are still happily programming in
OCaml.

Following my friend’s guidance has worked out for Arena and I would love
to know how other growing companies have thought through these tradeoffs
while innovating with less popular technologies. I want to express deep
gratitude for all of the amazing work by the entire OCaml community. As
we grow, we hope to give back what was so freely given.

.. [#] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linguistic_relativity
