.. post:: Dec 12, 2016
   :tags: functional programming, cuba
   :author: Michelle Micallef

Cuban Conference Crisis
==================================

.. image:: _static/author_imgs/michelle.png
   :align: right
   :target: http:///www.linkedin.com/in/michelle-micallef

By Michelle Micallef
********************

.. image:: _static/cuba_post/miramar_park.jpg
   :align: center

A year ago I could never have imagined my last night in Havana. I found
myself at the hip Fábrica de Arte Cubano, sitting with a glass of Ron
Santiago on the rocks, listening to `Bartosz Milewski
<https://bartoszmilewski.com/>`_ explain how to achieve determinism in a
concurrent system using a data structure called lattice variables (or
`LVars <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8dFO5Ir0xqY>`_).  Previously, I
was unhappily programming in Java doing Android Development for a large
tech company. After leaving, I found my current position with a small
company, Arena, that decided to write most of their software in
OCaml. At my company I was introduced [#]_ to functional programming
concepts and the local FP community here in New York City. When my
co-worker, `Rudi <http://rgrinberg.com/>`_, discovered that there would
be an FP conference, Monad Libre, in Cuba, a country still off limits to
American tourists, I knew I had to go.

In the week before arriving I was furiously reading my travel book,
getting a basic understanding of the island’s history. What interested
me most was Cuba’s “Special Period”, which occurred after the fall of
the Soviet Union. Cuba gained its independence from Spain in 1898 but
was under American influence until the communist revolution led by Fidel
Castro took the capital in 1959. Until 1989-91, the Cuban economy relied
on imports from and exports to the Soviet Union with an oil-for-sugar
program. So when the USSR collapsed, so did the Cuban economy. The
country lost approximately 80% of its imports, 80% of its exports and
its GDP dropped by 34% (compare this to our Great Depression where the
GDP dropped by only an estimated 15%).The effects on the Cuban people
were stark; poverty and hunger were rampant but Cubans resiliently
figured out how to survive.

My other source for Cuban history was the wonderful (and extremely NSFW)
novel, Dirty Havana Trilogy by Cuban author Pedro Juan
Gutiérrez. Through a collage of short sketches, Gutiérrez portrays life
in Havana during the Special Period while following the protagonist, a
middle aged man also named Pedro Juan, as he hustles to make enough
money to live.

.. image:: _static/cuba_post/plant_building.jpg
   :align: center

These were the images in my mind as Rudi and I finally drove through
Central Havana on our way to Vedado, the neighborhood where I would
stay. It was nighttime but we could clearly see the decay of the
buildings. Equally evident was the energy of the people as we watched
the throngs on the street, many hailing a cab home.

There were the expected things I encountered during my stay: beautiful
decay of buildings, the cigars and the daily summer storms.  Then there
was also the Fidel regime with its control and censorship that I had
learned of though unsure what to expect visiting as a monied
tourist. What surprised me about the country, given my American
ignorance, was how incredible Cuban art is. There were gorgeous statues
decorating the city streets (not to mention the hundreds of busts of
Cuba’s mustachioed hero José Martí) and I was blown away in the Museo
Nacional de Bellas Artes de La Habana.

.. image:: _static/cuba_post/arte_cubano.jpg
    :align: center

On my final night, at the Fábrica de Arte FAC I was able to see art by
contemporary Cuban artists.

.. image:: _static/cuba_post/flower_women.jpg
   :align: center

It was also here at the FAC where I learned more about that unpleasant
aspect of Cuban life: the control that government wields over its
citizens. I misled you, dear reader, in my introduction about there
being a functional programming conference in Havana. There was supposed
to be such a conference. While Rudi and I were in the Toronto airport
waiting to board our flight to Cuba, greedily downloading source code
and emails from the free wifi before our coming internet blackout, we
discovered that the conference had been canceled. Shocked but in total
agreement that we were still definitely going to Cuba, we quickly typed
an email to our boss to keep him the loop, subject line: Cuban
Conference Crisis. I was able to get the full story from two of the
planned speakers. Apparently the hotel where the conference was going be
held called the organizer last minute and apologizing, said they could
no longer host because their air conditioners were broken. Determined to
find an alternate location for the event he had spent months planning
for, the organizer met with several other hotels to make arrangements
for them to host the conference. Each one initially accepted but then
called back a few hours later to politely decline for one reason or
another. The speakers speculated that it was the “government” who was
behind the cancellation, though I’m queasy about using a nebulous and
vague word as the government. While the control that the Fidel
dictatorship has is well known, there are no definite explanations for
the event cancellation. It is also important to note that the Cuban
government has good reason to be suspicious of American involvement in
tech events. As recently as 2010, USAID was behind an effort to create a
Cuban Twitter in order to encourage “smart mobs” rebelling against the
authoritarian Cuban government [#]_.

Despite the disappointing cancellation, I was lucky to meet `Amir
Chaudhry <http://amirchaudhry.com/>`_, `Hannes Mehnert
<https://hannes.nqsb.io/>`_, Bartosz (as I mentioned) and another
conference attendee who is crazy about Scala. Amir and Hannes work on a
`unikernel <http://unikernel.org/>`_ platform called `MirageOS
<https://mirage.io/>`_, which is implemented in OCaml. Amir and I gushed
about `Merlin <https://github.com/the-lambda-church/merlin/wiki>`_, an
editor independent auto completion and type querying tool for OCaml,
though he also described the goal of the OCaml community to create
better tooling as a way to encourage more developers to learn the
language. Hannes told me about his badass lifestyle as a hacker academic
(he works for the University of Cambridge) and how he works remotely as
he travels around. For example, he recently worked in Marrakesh, Morocco
for months, culminating with the first MirageOS hackathon he helped
organize there.

On the flight home I shut my eyes letting my mind relive all the
memories of the past week and wishing I was still on the island: the
beauty and vibrant culture with that obscure undercurrent of
(potentially warranted) government paranoia. Perhaps Cuban politics
moves too slow for what us tech people are used to. Nevertheless, Cuba,
I will be back.

Oh, and here are some old cars:

.. youtube:: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=20gYSIzujdQ

.. [#] I should say re-introduced. My introductory computer science class at Brown was taught in Scheme and OCaml but that was years ago now.
.. [#] http://bigstory.ap.org/article/us-secretly-created-cuban-twitter-stir-unrest
